[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My topic for today is economic crisis plural, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss both the financial crisis of 2008, as well as the ongoing crisis in India, the
[Amit Varma]: full extent of which is only gradually and terrifyingly unraveling now. But we'll also
[Amit Varma]: go beyond this and we'll talk about what makes for an economic crisis in general. How do
[Amit Varma]: we recognize one? What do we do about it? My guest today is my good friend, Mohit Satyanand,
[Amit Varma]: who has been on the show a couple of times before. Mohit is an investor par excellence,
[Amit Varma]: as well as someone who can get to the heart of the most complex subjects and break them
[Amit Varma]: down in ways that anyone can understand. I've learned a lot from him over the years and
[Amit Varma]: in our circles. He's famous among many other things for having seen the 2008 crisis before
[Amit Varma]: it happened, and putting his money where his mouth was to profit from it in a big way.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit feels there is another huge crisis upon us now. But before you listen to the rest
[Amit Varma]: of this episode and then proceed to an underground bunker, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app. They have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of audio books that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages
[Amit Varma]: like Hindi and Marathi, and unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 299 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial. If you hop on over to storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly. So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to recommend one book a week that I love. The book I want to recommend today is Joseph
[Amit Varma]: Anton. This is a memoir by Salman Rushdie. And it's a beautiful book. I generally am
[Amit Varma]: not a big fan of Rushdie because of the baroque nature of his language. I prefer simplicity
[Amit Varma]: and minimalism. But Joseph Anton is a wonderful book actually like it more than any of his
[Amit Varma]: novels. And remember, you get a 30 day free trial only at storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, welcome to the scene in the unseen. Thanks very much, Amit. Lovely to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Mohit, when you were last here, both the two times that you've been here, the show was
[Amit Varma]: a slightly different format. It was much shorter. I think the first episode we did together
[Amit Varma]: was the shortest episode ever, which was about eight minutes.
[Amit Varma]: Appropriate given my height.
[Amit Varma]: And the last time we did an episode, which I'm really fond of on what poker and stock
[Amit Varma]: markets teach us about decision making and life in general, that was about just over
[Amit Varma]: half an hour, if I remember. But I've since moved on to a longer, more leisurely kind
[Amit Varma]: of format where I aim for one and a half, two hours. And I like to sort of begin it
[Amit Varma]: now by talking about my guest a little bit before we get to the subject at hand. So,
[Amit Varma]: you know, tell me a little bit more about yourself. What makes Mohit Satyanand Mohit
[Guest]: Satyanand?
[Guest]: So I'm 63 years old. So I've been on this planet a while. I'm one of those people who
[Guest]: has in the Indian idiom, bellowed many poppers. And, you know, poppers in life are quite accidental.
[Guest]: You never know what you're going to come up with. But one particular popper that I bellowed,
[Guest]: which was probably the tastiest of all, was something that I worked hard for, which was
[Guest]: to go and spend some time living quietly in the mountains and doing very little. So we
[Guest]: spent six years living in a little cottage in the Kumamon. And I think that that both
[Guest]: summed up one very deep part of my being and also prepared me for another part of life,
[Guest]: which is the ability to do nothing for very, very long periods of time, which was in very
[Guest]: deep contrast to the life that I'd led up until then, and which is now become this sort
[Guest]: of talisman that I draw upon when I feel I'm getting too drawn into dunyadari, which is
[Guest]: to say, actually, I can switch off and I can turn that key off and become very, very quiet
[Guest]: and mellow. In terms of outer manifestations, you know, when people ask you, what do you
[Guest]: do? So I started life as a management trainee with Hindustan Liver. I then set up a snack
[Guest]: food business as an intrapreneur. So I was neither an employee nor was I an entrepreneur,
[Guest]: but working from within a company, setting it up. I set up an ad agency, which failed
[Guest]: miserably, but luckily within two years, so it wasn't a big drain on my life. I spent
[Guest]: a lot of time in theatre. I worked with musicians very deeply. I then set up a practice to make
[Guest]: documentary films, and that little practice transformed itself at least twice. We became
[Guest]: producers of television software. And even though I then sort of exited from active roles
[Guest]: in the company, the company has done pretty well. It's called Teamwork Arts, and among
[Guest]: other things, it produces the Jepra Literature Festival. I still serve as chairman, though
[Guest]: given my level of activity, I'd like to say I'm actually a couch man because I'm lying
[Guest]: most of the time. I've, as you mentioned, and possibly the reason I'm here is that I've
[Guest]: been a moderately active investor. And most recently over the last five years, I've gotten
[Guest]: into a cycle of being an angel investor and mentor, which has in some ways been the most
[Guest]: rewarding activity of my life. Though, as I said, the most rewarding part of my life
[Guest]: is the inactivity.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've known you for about 12 or 13 years, I'd imagine. One of the things that
[Amit Varma]: struck me about you when I first met you and still strikes me about you is your clarity
[Amit Varma]: of thought and your clarity of thought doesn't come from sort of the certitude of someone
[Amit Varma]: who knows little and thinks he knows it all. But rather it comes from what and I don't
[Amit Varma]: want to embarrass you by flattering you too much, but from a place of deep wisdom, you
[Amit Varma]: know, over the years, I and many others in our circles have kind of learned a lot from
[Amit Varma]: you and can you kind of take me you know, beyond the journey of your career, which you
[Amit Varma]: just have, but through your intellectual journey, like in the sense, were you a confused young
[Amit Varma]: man? How did you sort of over the years arrive at this understanding of the world? This understanding
[Amit Varma]: of markets is understanding of how economies work? Who was it?
[Guest]: You know, I want to use one word. Intellectual. It's a word which we use a lot. It's a word
[Guest]: which we use to describe people like you, public intellectuals. And often people think
[Guest]: that intellectualism and wisdom are sort of congruent. And I think that I'm not an intellectual.
[Guest]: I've not read as much as many people like you have. And I'm a very bad reader. I tend
[Guest]: to forget at the conscious level, what I've read. So if I have any of this so called wisdom
[Guest]: with which you say you're not flattering me, I must accept that appellation with grace.
[Guest]: And I think it comes from two things, which are very deeply related. One is quietude and
[Guest]: reflection. And the other is compassion and observation of other people. I think these
[Guest]: have been the two most powerful forces in my life, apart from the influences of the
[Guest]: family. Because now that I'm a father of a grown young man, I can see a very sort of
[Guest]: clear linearity between my father and my son, both very wise, very quiet. And I'm not like
[Guest]: either of them. But I think there's some genetic streak of being able to be very quiet and
[Guest]: not affected deeply by what happens every day. And I think that gives you a little bit
[Guest]: of wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: And the time that you sort of spent, I mean, if I'm not mistaken, it's in your late 30s
[Guest]: that you took off to live in the hills.
[Guest]: No, actually, I celebrated my 40th birthday with the final decision to leave. And we had
[Guest]: we actually moved to the mountains in my 41st year and we came back in my 46th or 47th,
[Amit Varma]: six years.
[Amit Varma]: And besides the practice of being able to stay in quietude and not being able to do
[Amit Varma]: anything and just enjoying the solitude and the doing nothing, what are the fundamental
[Amit Varma]: reason which it changed the way you look at the world?
[Guest]: To my ability to perceive myself, not usually. I've always been fairly independent in the
[Guest]: way in which I think and conduct myself. But till I was in my late 30s, I was a very, very,
[Guest]: very social human being. And there was a lot of partying. Some of it went with the fact
[Guest]: of being in theater and working with musicians and the social life that goes around them.
[Guest]: And frankly, it's just me, you know, I like company. But I think I was already by then
[Guest]: beginning to tire of the repetitiveness of social occasions and so on. And so it's sort
[Guest]: of that period of six years allowed me to make that clean break between that cycle of
[Guest]: entertaining and being entertained, which seemed like a cycle you couldn't break without
[Guest]: being rude, to a situation where I was out of that cycle. And now I could come back into
[Guest]: a world and in a sense isolate those relationships that actually meant something to me and then
[Guest]: service them more deeply. So I'm not sure if there's a word really to express this,
[Guest]: because I'm not anti-social. I love company. You and I have spent many delicious days together.
[Guest]: But I don't seek out and I'm horrible at parties. And it, I think, possibly also related to
[Guest]: this was the fact that I now believe that every relationship requires or merits very,
[Guest]: very, very deep nourishing. And it's better to have five or 10 really deep relationships,
[Guest]: which are not marked by the quantity of time you spend together or the number of glasses
[Guest]: of wine you drink together, but by the consideration that you give to those relationships. So I
[Guest]: think it really helped me understand that what I was looking for in terms of my social
[Guest]: life was depth and nurturing rather than hilarity and amusement.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you speak about depth and how sort of going to Satholi, going
[Amit Varma]: away from the world and spending time with yourself helped you in that. And I'm kind
[Amit Varma]: of struck by the fact that in the last 10 years, especially what has happened to all
[Amit Varma]: of us and which I find myself fighting all the time is that we are constantly drawn out
[Amit Varma]: of ourselves into the shallow world of social media, for example, enabled in a sense by
[Amit Varma]: technology and social media, where it's very hard to get any deep work done, which is a
[Amit Varma]: subject I've written about in the past as well and a conundrum that I face and I try
[Amit Varma]: to solve and also, and it seems to be a journey into the opposite direction, which you took
[Amit Varma]: to Satholi where you go away from the people around you and you spend more time with yourself
[Amit Varma]: and understand yourself and how you relate to them better. Whereas in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: we are buffeted by a million shallow distractions from Twitter and Facebook and what's not immune
[Guest]: to those at all. I think I spent more time than I should on social media by a factor
[Guest]: of at least 10, maybe 100. And it's always a challenge. It's always a challenge, especially
[Guest]: when your interests are as wide ranging as mine to not get distracted. And I think I
[Guest]: certainly need to rein myself in from time. And one of the things that helps me hugely
[Guest]: in that is A, going back to that home in the middle of the forest. And even though it's
[Guest]: changed significantly, it still is very quiet and peaceful home. And B, the act of getting
[Guest]: up really early in the morning and dealing with myself alone for sometimes minutes, sometimes
[Guest]: hours. So this continual reminding of what really matters and where thoughts and sensitivities
[Guest]: come from is very important for me.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, speaking of waking up early, there are times where I've sent you a message just
[Amit Varma]: before I've gone to bed and you've replied immediately because it's five in the morning
[Amit Varma]: and I'm just going to sleep and you've just woken up. And yeah, that's kind of how the
[Amit Varma]: world works in strange ways, even when you're in the same time zone. Coming to sort of economics,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're 63 if I meet the 23 year old Mohit Satyanan and then we chat about
[Amit Varma]: economics, would he sort of have the same views as you do now? Or what was that sort
[Amit Varma]: of journey like? Were there any thinkers who influenced you? Any books which changed the
[Amit Varma]: world where you look at the world?
[Guest]: I was very badly educated, I have to say. You know, I did a master's in economics from
[Guest]: Delhi School of Economics, which was considered to be a reasonably good place to go to. I
[Guest]: was, I have to say, very frustrated by that whole experience. It was a good intellectual
[Guest]: training, you know, to read and distill and reproduce and I got reasonably good grades.
[Guest]: But I was very frustrated by the very deeply leftist ideology of the time, which was reinforced
[Guest]: by institutions like us. Thankful, though, that we weren't as deeply leftist as, as JNU.
[Guest]: But I could still in some very, very miasmic way understand the sheer hubris of central
[Guest]: planners being able to decide how an economy should progress. I could already see the glimmerings
[Guest]: of the fact that economics needed to be deeply expanded by understanding the workings of
[Guest]: human psychology. And it's a great joy to me that behavioral psychology, prospect behavior,
[Guest]: prospect theory, etc. are now such important subjects. I'm not saying I anticipated them
[Guest]: or understood how they worked, but…
[Amit Varma]: But you felt the vacuum that they ended up filling.
[Guest]: I felt a huge vacuum. And I was incredibly happy to leave the world of economics and
[Guest]: get into the world of business at age 21. So, if you'd met me at age 23, I would not
[Guest]: have been talking about economics at all. I would have been talking about sales and
[Guest]: business and, and how to put interesting products out into the marketplace. Economics
[Guest]: sort of disappeared from my way of thinking until… I can actually put a date on it,
[Guest]: pretty much. 97, 98.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: Which is when I met two people whom you know well, for the first time, both on the same
[Guest]: occasion, which was Parth Shah and Varun Mitra. At the time when both of them were looking at
[Guest]: doing some kind of think tank activity in India, neither of them had launched their
[Guest]: two think tanks, but they were already thinking about it. And there was a summer of very deep
[Guest]: meetings and a lot of conversation, etc. And they opened up my mind to Hayek, with whom I saw an
[Guest]: immediate resonance. Of course, he predated my studies in economics, but he wasn't even referenced
[Guest]: to in Delhi School of Economics. There was not one single Hayek reading in our reading list.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the hubris of the central planning that you referred to was summed up beautifully by Hayek
[Amit Varma]: in the 1980s with the term fatal conceit.
[Guest]: Exactly. So, in the early days of both of these gentlemen who both helped to shape
[Guest]: at least an alternative thought around economics and particularly public choice,
[Guest]: I was forced to re-educate myself and to read a lot more. And having that background in
[Guest]: theoretical economics probably made it a little easier for me to school myself in it. And
[Guest]: this began to draw my interest because by then I was not actively involved in a job or in business
[Guest]: and had a lot of time to observe. Of course, in between 1991, the economy had opened up hugely,
[Guest]: and one could see the results of that, both from a statistical point of view, as well as more
[Guest]: importantly from the lived point of view. Gradually, one was able to shed the starvation ideologies
[Guest]: that informed my teens and twenties and well into my thirties that shaped the way entrepreneurs
[Guest]: looked at business and hence shaped our economy. So, one was able to see that whole transition.
[Guest]: So, this is by way of a long answer to a question, how did I think about economics at 23?
[Guest]: Very little. I really started thinking about economics seriously at 43.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And before we sort of like I obviously want to talk about the two,
[Amit Varma]: but specific crisis that I mentioned in the introduction to the show, which is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in the early 2000s, you saw the 2008 crisis coming, put your money where your mouth
[Amit Varma]: was worked out. Well, more importantly, took some of my money out. Yeah. And of course,
[Amit Varma]: the current crisis, but before that, some fundamental brass tacks, and this is a subject
[Amit Varma]: you have taught also in various places in given talks about, but if I am to sort of go down to the
[Amit Varma]: very basic questions of how does an economy function? What is responsible for growth? How
[Amit Varma]: do we recognize a crisis? When it occurs? What are the factors and parameters we should look at?
[Guest]: Where would we begin to address this question? So, I would begin by saying that economic growth
[Guest]: stems primarily from technology. It stems from improvements in productivity. And those improvements
[Guest]: in productivity are primarily delivered by technology. This, of course, then makes you
[Guest]: wonder, is it worth studying economics at all? Or should we all study technology? I actually think
[Guest]: it would be better to study technology than economics. But deploying that technology brings
[Guest]: you right back into economics. And so, highly simplistic model, but the best models are the
[Guest]: most simplistic, or the most simple. Is that of a desert island economy, one shouldn't take it too
[Guest]: literally, but I imagine this small happy band of people living on a South Sea island, and
[Guest]: and they subsist on palm fronds to hide their modesty, fish, which they get out of the lagoon,
[Guest]: they don't have to wade more than thigh deep, and coconuts, which they break off a tree. And
[Guest]: they work an eight hour day, perhaps as a union, which dictates it or some custom or some God,
[Guest]: which says that terror will strike you down if you work more than eight hours a day. But
[Guest]: allowing for all the differences between individuals on average, in eight hours a day,
[Guest]: they're able to break enough coconuts to meet their needs for fat, and in the balance, get enough
[Guest]: fish to meet their needs for protein. So, they're fully keto compliant.
[Guest]: And this could go on forever. Because of the mild climate, there's no need for any investment in
[Guest]: real estate and they're all now how does an economy like this break out into a higher productivity
[Guest]: zone? The way I conceive it is that there's this one dreamer, as always a dreamer, who says, why
[Guest]: should I have to spend four hours a day breaking coconuts, climbing up the tree and dangling from
[Guest]: one hand and with the risk of the coconut falling on my wife's head and the risk of me slipping down
[Guest]: and so on? Surely there's a better way. And so, this guy has this idea of rigging up some
[Guest]: contraption with dried palm fronds, some kind of dried weeds that he sees in the sea, etc, etc,
[Guest]: to pull those coconuts down. And he experiments and he finds that it's not happening. It's taking
[Guest]: too long. It's not going anywhere. So, now imagine that this guy instead starts for a few days,
[Guest]: works 12 hours a day and now stacks enough coconuts that he has seven or eight days when he doesn't
[Guest]: have to break these coconuts. And he experiments with this thing and this thing works. And he's
[Guest]: now able to bring down the six coconuts that he needs instead of in four or five hours in 10
[Guest]: minutes. Now, from an economics point of view, we have to understand what happened. The first thing
[Guest]: that happened was that he saved. He saved coconuts for 10 or 12 days till he had a stockpile of
[Guest]: coconuts lying in the corner. Savings, we all understand. We know that savings is one of the
[Guest]: important parts of the fundamental economics equation. Secondly, he converted that savings
[Guest]: into a tool which worked. This tool is what economists call investment. And this also we
[Guest]: know from a theoretical view of economics, that savings need to be converted into investment.
[Guest]: Now you leverage that investment back into the economy. That investment becomes a productive
[Guest]: investment. You can have done investments too. And that is very much part of this whole crisis
[Guest]: cycle. So it's become a productive investment. That productive investment has led to huge
[Guest]: jumps in his productivity. So this is a really, really simple model. But I find it very effective,
[Guest]: both to teach young people the fundamentals of what makes an economy work and be for my
[Guest]: to remind myself whenever I see something complex, what exactly is happening in the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So at a very basic level, if I can try summing it up, you've set a virtuous cycle in motion.
[Amit Varma]: What he's done is he's worked a little hard and generated savings, the extra time that he gets
[Amit Varma]: because of those savings, which are essentially the savings itself, he then ploughs into the
[Amit Varma]: ploughs into worthwhile investment, which is inventing this technology, and then puts the
[Amit Varma]: technology back into his primary job of getting coconuts. And therefore his savings multiply
[Amit Varma]: further, he has the you know, everybody else also gets to save and they ploughed out into
[Amit Varma]: more investment of funky things. And that's how
[Guest]: Now I want you to consider an alternative that this guy, the reason that he saved was that
[Guest]: his wife had seen on some other guy's wife's fingers, sorry for being sexist over here,
[Guest]: this glistening pearl. And when he made an investigation, he found that his fellow Islander
[Guest]: had spent 15 days combing at the far edges of the atoll for this pearl. And so he decides to save
[Guest]: enough coconuts that he can dive for 15 days. So he dives for those 15 days. And at the end of
[Guest]: that diving, he comes up with this pearl. He saved, he's used the savings to find the pearl.
[Guest]: But that's not a productive investment. Because now he has to go back to working six hours a day
[Guest]: to get the number of coconuts that he needs to feed himself and his family.
[Amit Varma]: His savings are wiped out and he no longer, he's not increased his productivity.
[Guest]: Right. So you can have dud investments too. Investments which do not result in any
[Guest]: improvement in productivity. Whether one should call that pearl an investment or not is a very
[Guest]: moot question. And I've left it moot for reasons that become apparent when you look at the real
[Guest]: economy.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And, you know, when you speak of technology, I would also caution listeners from taking it too
[Amit Varma]: literally. I'd, you know, interpret technology as being much broader. For example, once I remember
[Amit Varma]: reading about a thought experiment, where what if in the United States, you could send corn to
[Amit Varma]: Florida, and there was a factory there which turned the corn into cars. That's fantastic, right?
[Amit Varma]: You'd think that's an incredible technology. And actually, there is a technology that does turn
[Guest]: corn into cars. It's called trade.
[Guest]: It's called the modern economy.
[Amit Varma]: It's called trade. So you know, they send the corn to Japan, Japan sends back cars. That's
[Amit Varma]: broadly, simplistically how it works. But trade in a sense is also a form of technology because
[Amit Varma]: you are enabling positive some transactions through which both people are benefiting and
[Amit Varma]: therefore both are more productive. And that's also a form of technology. So technology doesn't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily mean a machine made of bamboo fronds with which you're bringing coconuts down, or a
[Amit Varma]: machine with which you are churning out more widgets or whatever sort you're making. But also
[Amit Varma]: these inanimate kind of
[Guest]: Absolutely. In fact, in sessions where I have more time, I then expand this model to money
[Guest]: invested in outrigger canoes, which then reach to other islands and maybe the other island has
[Guest]: tapioca and not just palm and it has a different kind of fish and so on and so forth. And just
[Guest]: showing what the gains from trade can be and then you can get into all of the standard textbook
[Guest]: stuff like comparative advantage and resource endowment and so on so forth. But for the
[Guest]: purposes of this particular discussion where we are talking about credit crises and financial
[Guest]: crises and so on, trade and so on are not that important to that narrative.
[Amit Varma]: Your key point is savings lead to growth.
[Guest]: No. It's not. It's that savings
[Guest]: Well invested
[Guest]: Well invested. That bridge is the very, very key bridge.
[Amit Varma]: So savings are necessary but not sufficient.
[Guest]: Clearly not sufficient because I could have used those savings to buy a pearl.
[Amit Varma]: Which doesn't lead to growth.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there could technically be an argument that you're giving the pearl to your wife and
[Amit Varma]: she treats you much better and you are much happier and that happiness leads to more
[Amit Varma]: productivity. But let's leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: True, true, true.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but yeah, I buy your point. So what causes crisis?
[Guest]: Crisis, first of all, let me say in the historical perspective is relative, right? So even after a
[Guest]: financial crisis like the one in 2008, we are all still a lot better off than we were for 99.9% of
[Guest]: humankind. So crisis right now is in the context where we started to take growth and decadal
[Guest]: improvement in living standards, etc., etc. for granted. And crisis also relative inter-sea
[Guest]: because the kind of crisis that you saw in 2008, let's say in the West, was pretty mild compared
[Guest]: to, for example, the kind of crisis that you're seeing in Venezuela today, which is not primarily
[Guest]: a financial crisis, primarily a political crisis. So it's all very relative.
[Guest]: But if we look at some of the major financial crises in history of which 2008 is the only one
[Guest]: that one has really lived and subsequently studied a little bit, then I would say that it comes
[Guest]: primarily from malinvestment, which is why I underline the fact that it's not savings that
[Guest]: it's is enough, it's investment. Meaning that you make investments, which do not result in
[Guest]: long term returns and going back into that cycle of consumption. And since savings like anything
[Guest]: else in an economy are scarce, and they are the lifeblood of growth, when they are poorly
[Guest]: deployed, then they lead to a deep shock to the system. And part of that shock comes from
[Guest]: expectations. So the expectations are on the part of the lenders, which are the banks, and they're
[Guest]: on the part of the borrowers, both of them expect a return on those on those borrowings on the
[Guest]: money that they've taken. And when they don't come, then they're a shock to the system. They're
[Guest]: a shock in several ways. They're obviously a shock to the person who borrowed the money and can't
[Guest]: repay it. They're a shock to the person who's lent the money. And now his or her salary, his or her
[Guest]: profits, the bank are now endangered. But they also get deeply amplified by the fact that, firstly,
[Guest]: now, because the banks run on a rotation of that available capital, that now the money that they
[Guest]: should have got back and now been able to lend to other people is not available. So other projects,
[Guest]: which may or may not have led to malinvestment, cannot now be funded. So now the source of
[Guest]: alternate growth also starts getting choked off. And they also get amplified by the particular
[Guest]: nature of banking, which is fractional reserve banking, which means that for every rupee that
[Guest]: I have in capital in my bank, the banking system actually ends up lending, to take a number, it
[Guest]: obviously is impacted by various things that happen. But to take a number is, leads to 10
[Guest]: rupees of saving. And so that means that if my capital now as a result of deep losses, contracts
[Guest]: by 5%, then again, to take away simplistic number, it means that I have to contract my lending,
[Guest]: not by 5%, but by 50%. So that's the kind of shock that comes into the system when you have a
[Guest]: fractional reserve banking system, and when a vast swathe of loans goes bad.
[Amit Varma]: So just to sort of demystify it for listeners who may not be entirely aware of, you know, what all
[Amit Varma]: these terms mean. Now, when you talk about savings being invested, what you're obviously, it's not
[Amit Varma]: that every individual is investing his savings somewhere, he's putting it in the bank or in
[Amit Varma]: whatever financial instruments he chooses, fixed deposits, etc. And then it's the banks, which
[Amit Varma]: which put that back further into the economy. And because of fractional reserve banking, if you put
[Amit Varma]: in 10 rupees in the bank, the bank can essentially lend out say 100 bucks.
[Amit Varma]: Eventually.
[Guest]: Because that bank makes that money available, the person who borrows the money puts that in
[Guest]: another bank, that bank then has more money to dip into and loans that on. So it's not as though
[Guest]: the one rupee that you deposit with me, empowers me to lend 10 rupees immediately. It's by the
[Guest]: fact that the money rotates through the bank and goes from one bank to a second to a third to a
[Guest]: fourth, or perhaps indeed back to the same bank, that you get this multiplication effect. So the
[Guest]: eventual effect through this reserve system can be as much as, as 10x. And in fact, at the time
[Guest]: of the worst crises, like the 2008 crisis, due to a whole lot of other factors and so called
[Guest]: innovations, I mean, there were innovations, but innovations in the banking system, in some
[Guest]: instruments, in some cases, the leverage was not 10 is to one, but 30 is to one and 50 is to one
[Guest]: and 60 is to one. So relatively small variations in the value of what you had loaned out, led to
[Guest]: massive ripple effects and Wall Street virtually coming to its knees.
[Amit Varma]: And banks, of course, can either make productive investments, which is invest in
[Amit Varma]: different kinds of technology, for example, entrepreneurs who are actually going to do
[Amit Varma]: productive things for the economy, and so on and so forth. Or they can make malinvestments. But
[Amit Varma]: the thing to remember, I presume, again, thinking in a very basic way, is that incentives matter,
[Amit Varma]: banks would be responding to incentives and investing accordingly. Did this sort of play a
[Guest]: part in the 2008 crisis coming up? It played a part. I think when you look at the 2008 crisis,
[Guest]: you realize that crises of that magnitude have enough blame to share among many, many players.
[Guest]: And it's very easy, depending on your political inclination to point the finger at one particular
[Guest]: player. So depending on which side of the political system is rendering the narrative,
[Guest]: one or two players get identified. So I don't want to play that same game. And I would like to say
[Guest]: that banks were very much the ultimate instrument of this whole game. And therefore, they certainly
[Guest]: had a huge share of the blame. But one of my pet themes is that, you know, when we talk about a
[Guest]: free market economy, that's again, really relative, because the one of the biggest ingredients of a
[Guest]: market is money. And money, the price of money, which is the interest rate is not free. It's set
[Guest]: by a central bank. And the most powerful central bank in the world is the Federal Reserve. And
[Guest]: therefore, the actions of the Federal Reserve are critical to this whole process. And due to a whole
[Guest]: host of conditions that preceded the 2003 to 2007 boom, I would say that the price of money was
[Guest]: too, too, too low. And there is a truism in financial economics, which says good times make
[Guest]: for bad loans. And an analogy for that is that if brick became really, really expensive, and
[Guest]: concrete and steel became really, really cheap, nobody would use bricks to build a house, they
[Guest]: would use steel, and steel would get greatly overused. So now imagine a situation and this is
[Guest]: very close to the reality of what happened in in the US in that period, the money is now virtually
[Guest]: free, meaning that you can borrow vast sums of money from the Federal Reserve at very, very low
[Guest]: rates and historically rock bottom rates. As a user of money for your business, what are you
[Guest]: going to do, you're going to say let's get as much of it as possible. And what do banks do? Banks
[Guest]: essentially sell money, right? And the price of that money is the interest that so they buy the
[Guest]: money, in this case from the Federal Reserve, and they sell the money to their borrowers. And in
[Guest]: both cases, the cost is the interest rate. So banks were hiring salesmen, loan salesmen. So
[Guest]: what they sell is loans, hiring loan salesmen by the thousands, because the money was really,
[Guest]: really so cheap. Now, inevitably, economics 101 tells us then when you have a huge supply of
[Guest]: something, you're going to sell it on really attractive terms. So what are those terms?
[Guest]: In in the lending system, what are the terms, the price is obviously one. But the second is
[Guest]: the covenants, which are what the conditions by which you sell the money under which you make
[Guest]: those loans, those are going to become less and less and less stringent. Because in the background,
[Guest]: what is happening is that the narrative is changing. The narrative is one that all of that
[Guest]: money is sloshing around. It's driving up asset prices, which means the price of houses going up,
[Guest]: the price of shares is going up. Employment is getting created, cars are being sold, etc. So
[Guest]: it's driving up the price of assets, everybody is feeling better and better. So there is this
[Guest]: bullish fervor in the economy, even for those who are not participants in in the financial market.
[Guest]: So everybody is really feeling good. What do you do when you feel good? You lower your risk
[Guest]: threshold, you go into more and more risky things. So this is well documented, the covenants go down.
[Guest]: And most importantly, in the US at that point in time, stock markets are doing well, etc. But the
[Guest]: most bullish of all the asset classes in the US will housing, housing prices were going up. And
[Guest]: in fact, the 2007 2008 crash was centered around housing. How did it happen? Firstly, the symptoms,
[Guest]: which are easier to identify now than they were then, but some people did identify them.
[Guest]: And it's thanks to reading some of them that I was also able to see them. The price of real estate
[Guest]: went up between 96 and 2006 to by 92%. So it almost doubled in 10 years. In India, this doesn't
[Guest]: sound excessive, we're used to that kind of number. But in the US, this was more than three times the
[Guest]: cumulative increase in real estate prices in the previous century. And the reason for that is that
[Guest]: previous century. Right? So in the previous century, real estate prices gone up by an average
[Guest]: of 2% per annum. In the US during this period, they went up by roughly 9% per annum. Now what
[Guest]: started happening? When people who were making loans against real estate, looked at the data
[Guest]: to analyze risk, what is the likelihood of this money not coming? They looked in the rearview
[Guest]: mirror, but their rearview mirror was not going back much further than 95 or 96. People don't look
[Guest]: back further than that. And they were seeing that in this context, this is the extent by which there
[Guest]: is a variation in house prices. So what is the risk? The risk is low. And as a result, the margin
[Guest]: that people had to pay on taking a loan against a house kept shrinking. In India was still reasonably
[Guest]: conservative about these things. You know, you would look at 20, 25, 30%. In the US, there were
[Guest]: cases where the margin being paid was five and 10%. And because of the volume of money that was
[Guest]: flooding into the US banking system, nobody had the time to pay attention. In many cases, even the
[Guest]: margin was on credit. So people were using credit cards to make the down payment on the house.
[Guest]: And that down payment was seen as a margin against the larger loan. So actually, the house was
[Guest]: constructed entirely on credit. And there was this phenomenal phenomenon of the time called Ninja.
[Guest]: So you had Ninja loans, which were every bit as dangerous as the term sounds. It was no income,
[Guest]: no job, no assets. So these are the three principles against which loans are made of housing.
[Guest]: You need to have income and or a job, the two usually go hand in hand, but you could be a
[Guest]: businessman or whatever. So you would look at tax returns, etc. No asset, but the loan was made.
[Guest]: Why? Because the house itself was seen as its asset. And then this asset went into this
[Guest]: exponential increase. And it became like an ATM against which further loans could be made.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like you have absolutely no money and no way of getting money, but you managed to get a
[Amit Varma]: loan for a house anyway. And then because you now own a house on the basis of that house, which is
[Amit Varma]: appreciating in value, you take out further mortgages and get more loans and more money and
[Guest]: you buy more houses. Right? Right. So there were weird cases of and in fact, I remember writing an
[Guest]: article for perhaps you when you were editing one of the publications I wrote for, which had case
[Guest]: studies of there was, for example, this woman who was a part time nurse, who had seven children.
[Guest]: And she managed to raise $5,000 and bought a $200,000 house. And two months later,
[Guest]: the house was now valued at $220,000. And therefore her equity in this house went from
[Guest]: 5000 to $25,000. So now she was five times as rich. And as a result of that, was able to get
[Guest]: a loan because she was now worth $20,000. Right? So she was able to get a $5,000 loan to pay for
[Guest]: a holiday to the Caribbean. And other stories of people who did the same kind of thing and then
[Guest]: use the money that they could draw from the bank to make what they thought was an investment.
[Guest]: And this goes back to the earlier point, which was to build a deck. So the deck costs $30,000.
[Guest]: And everybody said, this is a great investment, because now the value of the house has gone up
[Guest]: by another $40,000. But what they were confusing was valuation of an asset with investment.
[Guest]: Because the way I look at investment is that it must generate sustainable, long term increases
[Guest]: in productive capacity. To argue that a deck increases the productive capacity of the economy
[Guest]: is to forget what the prime drivers of an economy are. So we saw that during this period,
[Guest]: from sort of the mid 90s to 2006, US household debt mushroomed from 80% of GDP to 130% of GDP.
[Guest]: So ordinary households in the US suddenly owed their own financial system an additional
[Guest]: six months of GDP, at the same time as household savings were going down. So look at the peculiar
[Guest]: dynamic. Savings were going down, which should have resulted in investment going down and perhaps
[Guest]: being more careful about the kind of investment you made. But instead, they led to this huge
[Guest]: proliferation of unproductive expenditure, I wouldn't call it investment.
[Amit Varma]: So let me try to sum up everything that you've kind of just said and tell me if it's broadly
[Amit Varma]: accurate. I mean, I've done an episode on easy money, which is a series of books Vivek Kaur has
[Amit Varma]: written. And in that episode, we kind of discuss the damage that easy money which is basically these
[Amit Varma]: low interest rates, you're making money available to the banks for very, very cheap, the damage that
[Amit Varma]: they can do. And like you correctly said that that is feared banking, those rates are, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not set by a free market, it comes from the state. And what really led to the crisis was this
[Amit Varma]: belief by the likes of Alan Greenspan and the others that this can go on forever, you just keep
[Amit Varma]: making money cheaper and cheaper and cheaper, and it sloshes out into into the economy, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: just keep growing forever. But what happened was because the bank had access to so much easy money,
[Amit Varma]: that they started giving more and more loans out with all this money that they had. And they gave
[Amit Varma]: them out on increasingly cheaper terms, whether those cheaper terms are in terms of the interest
[Amit Varma]: rate that consumers paid, or whether it's in terms of the covenants or the conditions that
[Amit Varma]: went into it. And of course, this was also exacerbated by a bunch of factors, which I
[Amit Varma]: actually want to do a future episode on the 2008 crisis alone, which is something for the future.
[Amit Varma]: And I even have a guest in mind, I have to write to him. But there were a whole bunch of complicated
[Amit Varma]: factors like, you know, they would then they were not worried about the risk of these loans,
[Amit Varma]: because they would parcel it out in using these complex instruments that were given good ratings
[Amit Varma]: by credit rating agencies, which were paid by the banks themselves.
[Guest]: Not just that, there was also an oligopoly, a state mandated oligopoly on credit rating agencies,
[Guest]: only three were allowed to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and they weren't autonomous, they were essentially paid by these people. So,
[Amit Varma]: the incentives were to keep the banks happy, which absolutely cannot work. Plus, you had
[Amit Varma]: the semi government agencies, Fannie and Freddie, basically guaranteeing all of these loans,
[Amit Varma]: thus creating a sort of moral hazard there. And you had, I mean, if your Google Community
[Amit Varma]: and reinvestment act, which is something that came about in the late 1970s, if I remember,
[Amit Varma]: which incentivize the banks to lend to people who would otherwise not be loan worthy.
[Guest]: In fact, it was a little more insidious than that, which is that, you know, prior to a particular
[Guest]: date, I forget the date. US banks were highly restricted in terms of their operations.
[Guest]: Consumer banks could only operate in one state. And when the government decided that they would
[Guest]: allow banks to apply for national licenses, one of the conditions was that they should increase
[Guest]: their share of lending to what were redlined areas. Redlined areas being those areas where
[Guest]: largely black or Hispanic or whatever, where a very small share of housing and mortgage loans
[Guest]: found their way. So, they're actually being pressured in a way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the incentives were corrupted all along. So, much as you know, the narrative about the
[Amit Varma]: typical populist narrative about greedy bankers has some merit, you also have to look at the
[Amit Varma]: systems and the structures within which they function. And there is a lot of confusion
[Amit Varma]: around. And there is a lot of blame, I would say the lion's share of the blame to be taken
[Amit Varma]: by the state. But leave that aside, that's a subject for another day.
[Guest]: In fact, just to finish off that point, in his book, Fault Lines, Raghuram Rajan, who was one
[Guest]: of the few central bankers to see it coming, in his analysis, he actually says that there was
[Guest]: a political and hence policy compulsion to make credit cheap because the lack of upward mobility
[Guest]: of the working class in the US created a compulsion to make them feel good. And making them, making a
[Guest]: higher percentage of them household owners and seeing household prices go up was a key feel good
[Guest]: policy of the government. I almost found that too sort of, too scheming to be credible. But I'm sure
[Guest]: he knew what he was talking about. Otherwise, he wouldn't have written about it.
[Amit Varma]: Raghuram Rajan, and this is another classic example of good politics in the short term
[Amit Varma]: leading to bad economics in the long run. But sort of moving away from what the crisis itself
[Amit Varma]: was and shifting the focus back to you. You saw the crisis coming, why did you see the crisis
[Amit Varma]: coming? What were the warning bells and take me through your journey of one beginning to recognize
[Amit Varma]: the crisis, figuring out that yes, I'm not wrong, this is really a crisis and then figuring out what
[Amit Varma]: should I do about it. And then all the way through to when the crisis ends.
[Guest]: Right. So you never figure out that you're right till it actually happens. And as you and I have
[Guest]: discussed often, investing is a probabilistic game. And it's very, you can never assign 100%
[Guest]: probability to anything. And today, my thinking on that is probably a little bit more nuanced.
[Guest]: And I understand something about Bayesian logic, which I certainly didn't at that point in time.
[Guest]: So I think I also need to go back just in terms of my own personal journey to the period 99,
[Guest]: 2000, when I was living in the mountains, and therefore my contact with the world of investing
[Guest]: was very, very limited. But there were a couple of points in time when I did spend a little bit
[Guest]: of time in the city. And very interestingly, for a very brief period of time, I think all of six
[Guest]: days, I anchored daytime television for several hours a day on CNBC, when they were just beginning
[Guest]: to move into becoming a stock market channel. And this was also the time of the IT boom.
[Guest]: And I was like this country hick who'd been pulled out of a small village in Kumau,
[Guest]: and talking to people who saw the world in a very, very different way. And I was looking
[Guest]: at investments, you know, you invest in a company, and maybe 20 years later, it's worth something.
[Guest]: And I found people asking me on a day to day basis, literally, so what is the price of Infosys
[Guest]: stock going to be next week? And I would say I'll be lucky if I get the price for next decade,
[Guest]: right, and not next week. And I realized that this was a very, very different game from the way in
[Guest]: which I thought. And I was very late to the IT party, I bought some Infosys stock at 3500 rupees.
[Guest]: And I next saw a newspaper a month later, because we didn't get newspapers where I was.
[Guest]: And I rubbed my eyes because the price was now 4500 rupees and I actually went to an STD booth.
[Guest]: This is before the days of cell phones, I went to an STD booth, called up my stockbroker and said,
[Guest]: you know, I thought I bought the Infosys stock at 3500. Paper is now saying 4500. Did I make a
[Guest]: mistake? He said, no sir, it's gone from 3500 to 4500 and it'll go to 10,000. But this kind of
[Guest]: dialogue disturbed me very, very deeply. And anyway, I went off on a long trek and I came back
[Guest]: and reached home in the middle of the night and so didn't pick up a newspaper on the way and maybe a
[Guest]: couple of months later came back to Delhi. And it was 6500 rupees. So I was very lucky. And I
[Guest]: saw all in like three months. And this was now beginning to just look completely weird.
[Guest]: So I picked up a piece of paper and a pencil, I got a hold of two or three of the balance sheets
[Guest]: in those days, you had to actually get physical copies and so on so forth, and did some back of
[Guest]: the envelope calculations before I knew how to use a spreadsheet, how to use a calculator, paper,
[Guest]: pencil. And I said, by my logic, and by the way, I look at the price of money, the share price has
[Guest]: got to go up the earnings of this firm have got to go up by I forget the number 60% per annum for
[Guest]: the next 10 years to justify this price. And I don't know of any company in the history of the
[Guest]: world that has seen its earnings go up by 60% per annum for 10 years. Therefore, this is a sell.
[Guest]: And I rang up my broker, and I said, please sell the share. And he said, so I said, on momentum
[Guest]: alone, your guess is good as mine, my guess is it'll go to 11,000. I was just joking with him,
[Guest]: obviously. But I'm selling today. And we were both wrong because it went to 12,000. But within a
[Guest]: year, it was 1000 rupees. So in a very, very, very tiny way, I saw what that kind of reckless
[Guest]: optimism could do to a stock. I'm talking about my personal participation,
[Guest]: newspapers, etc, one saw, but this personal act of taking a call and exiting in a contrarian way
[Amit Varma]: happened in that really tiny way in. And this would have underlined the importance of following
[Guest]: through on your conviction. Correct. And on hard numbers and some amount of analysis.
[Guest]: So now, in 2007, I saw all the signs of euphoria. The signs were that so I started investing in
[Guest]: stocks seriously in 2003. For the reason that AI returned to the city after six years be that I saw
[Guest]: that interest rates in India were the lowest that they'd been in memory. And I thought this was a
[Guest]: good reason for a bull run. And in 2003, there were several beaten down sectors like consumer
[Guest]: goods, etc, which nobody was buying. I could see the logic very clearly, I bought them.
[Guest]: Nobody was buying even my stockbroker, why are you buying this share? Nobody's interested,
[Guest]: there's no liquidity. So in a sense, 2003, I went through the same cycle of being
[Guest]: for want of a better word contrarian, you know, buying stocks was on the wrong side of the market.
[Guest]: But actually, that's the place to be right, you only make money when you're on the wrong side of
[Guest]: the market. And then in 2006, 2007, I saw all the people who didn't believe in buying stocks in 2003,
[Guest]: now piling into the market. This was the first sort of sign to me that the psychology is changing.
[Guest]: And it's when markets start getting really crowded with buyers that you need to be
[Guest]: looking at in caution. But that was only one part of it. The second part of it and what really
[Guest]: informed my thinking was some of the numbers that I've talked to you about, you know, here was a
[Guest]: time as I told you, I had got re exposed to economics, I was getting interested, I was doing
[Guest]: a lot of reading, the internet was coming alive. And therefore you could read a lot more than you
[Guest]: could when I was a student in the formal sense of economics. I was a much better informed student,
[Guest]: I had access to a much bigger library than the Delhi University Library, I had the library of
[Guest]: the world's publications. And so I could see some of these signs, I could see how
[Guest]: credit in the US was expanding, how households were taking on debt, I could see this whole
[Guest]: McMansion phenomenon happening, you know, everybody buying homes, people buying third
[Guest]: and fourth and fifth homes, people with no income, no jobs, no assets. And by then, I think I was
[Guest]: fully internalized to this fact that boom leads to bust, and that good times make bad loans,
[Guest]: and that when loans go bad, the whole banking system goes kaput. So the more I read, and you
[Guest]: know what, these often very self reinforcing, you start reading something, it leads to a link to
[Guest]: something else. And this, this conviction started building in my head. And India at the time was
[Guest]: also going through an unprecedented boom phase. And that boom was being fueled by, yes, we had a
[Guest]: high savings rate. We've never seen that savings rate again. And I'll come to that a little bit
[Guest]: later if we get there. We also are experts for booming. Experts were growing 15% per annum again,
[Guest]: which was quite unprecedented. And because of all of this money sloshing around all over the world,
[Guest]: there was all of this money coming into India as well. And so the question I had to ask myself was,
[Guest]: if there's a sudden stop in this whole credit cycle, what is the impact on India going to be?
[Guest]: You know, is India going to be one of the last places from where the money retreats or one of
[Guest]: the first places? And from whatever I read in the management literature and the banking
[Guest]: literature, I came to the firm hypothesis that when there's a crisis, people withdraw to the center.
[Guest]: So if you have a money manager in the US, the last place that he's going to pull money out of is the
[Guest]: US. The first place is going to pull money out of is the Cameroons or Bangladesh or, or India. And
[Guest]: so I came to believe that while in scale, the impact on the US would be the largest in terms of
[Guest]: time and severity, India as a capital short nation would be one of the first to feel the impact.
[Guest]: Not comparing it to other nations, since one was not exposed to markets in any other nations, but
[Guest]: just as an Indian, here was stock markets, which were richly valued in a time when growth and flow
[Guest]: of capital was its its greatest. And if the engine of that money, which was the US, if the credit
[Guest]: system got disrupted over there, then we would be the earliest to feel the impact. Now at the time,
[Guest]: I was writing a fortnightly column in a magazine, which was reasonably widely followed by investors,
[Guest]: which was called Outlook Money. And I was for the first time in my, for the only time in my life,
[Guest]: I guess, a journalist with a badge. So you know, I was on the I was not just a byline, I was on the
[Guest]: masthead, I was consulting editor, and I was writing fortnightly, sometimes two columns in every issue
[Guest]: on investing specifically on equity investing. And I've been very much a votary of the bull run,
[Guest]: and very much a votary of shifting money from secondary investments, meaning
[Guest]: post office savings banks and FDs and so on into primary investments, which was equity.
[Guest]: But by May 2007, I was so completely convinced that this was about to come to an end. If I have
[Guest]: the date, right, I may be off by a couple of days, but not more than that. If I remember right,
[Guest]: on May 23, 2007, I wrote my column and it said, the end of the GIBDR. So that title was necessitated
[Guest]: by the fact that there was only that much space on the page, which I then said the great Indian
[Guest]: bull run. So this is the end of the GIBR, the great Indian bull run. Of course, I was completely
[Guest]: wrong. This was May 2007. And if I remember right, the Nifty was at about 4500 at that point in time.
[Guest]: And I started exiting stocks. I also started for the first time in my life, I started
[Guest]: shorting the market through various instruments. And I set a certain sum of money aside, I was not
[Guest]: naive enough to believe that the shorts would make money from day one. But
[Guest]: they took much longer than I thought to make money. And for the next seven months,
[Guest]: my conviction was being questioned every day, implicitly or explicitly by a market which went
[Guest]: from 4500 to 6300. And all this while you were shorting stocks and losing money and losing money.
[Guest]: I was writing a check every month to my broker for the stocks I was short. Did this make you
[Amit Varma]: question yourself and think that am I wrong? Am I missing something? Am I falling prey to
[Amit Varma]: confirmation bias? You know, so I hadn't met you then I didn't know the word confirmation bias.
[Guest]: But I questioned my hypothesis. I read more and more and more and more. I went deeper into economic
[Guest]: history. And I could find absolutely no way to destroy my own hypothesis, except for that one
[Guest]: ingredient which seemed to be fueling everybody else, which was hope. I actually found nothing
[Guest]: to destroy that hypothesis. And I remember one day telling my sister, I don't talk much about
[Guest]: finance and economics with anybody in my family, because they never questioned me, they're not
[Guest]: interested. They're all people of very modest needs. And those get met quite simply. But I
[Guest]: remember one day, telling my sister, she I think she may have asked me, how come there's so much
[Guest]: money lying in my account? Meaning, like, why have you sold the stock? And why is there all this
[Guest]: cash lying there? So I remember the words with which I said, you know, it's like I'm standing
[Guest]: at the railway crossing and I can see this train coming. And I know that it's about to crash. But
[Guest]: when I point it out to other people, they can't see it. And the train keeps on coming and the train
[Guest]: keeps on coming. And I rubbed my eyes and I read more and nothing changed my view. And, and of
[Guest]: course, you were, you know, aware of the saying that the markets can stay irrational more than
[Amit Varma]: an individual can stay solvent. Oh, yes, I was acutely aware of it. And more so because as I was
[Guest]: sort of hatching this idea, I was thinking, well, I'm going to go and buy a train. And I
[Guest]: was more so because as I was sort of hatching this plot and drawing data and talking to people and
[Guest]: so on so forth, I acquired a co conspirator, a person who was probably more financially literate
[Guest]: than me was a full time markets person. And we both started taking shorts together. And
[Guest]: after three and a half or four months, he rung me up and almost apologetically, it's not that our
[Guest]: money was pooled or anything, we were just working in parallel. But almost apologetically, he told me,
[Guest]: I'm getting out, because I'm having sleepless nights, and it's not worth it.
[Guest]: Luckily, I never had sleepless nights. So I think part of it was that I sort of
[Guest]: set a sum aside and circumscribe that sum. And actually, I would have sought to exhausted that
[Guest]: sum by March of 2008. But between January 20, and Republic Day, I think it was 21st and 22nd,
[Guest]: or 22nd and 23rd. The nifty tank like 15% in two days. So I made up all the money that I'd
[Guest]: frittered away, or if you want to say in retrospect, invested in shorts,
[Guest]: it all came back in two days. And then of course, went on through 2008.
[Guest]: Guy Ready And you kept making money through
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: Professor Karan Devi I kept making money, I kept making money.
[Guest]: I continued the shorts. And, but I,
[Guest]: so I actually did three things. One is that I took money out of the market, you know,
[Guest]: I liquidated part of the portfolio. And they just sat on the sidelines, you know,
[Guest]: the money in my sister's account, for example. The second thing that I did was with a very tiny
[Guest]: sum of money. So it was a small, it was a small pile. I took on shorts. And those of course,
[Guest]: did extraordinarily well as a return on that, on that starting pool. You know, in those kinds of
[Guest]: situations, returns are not measured in percent per annum, they're measured in
[Guest]: multiples per annum. But again, I want to underline that the pool was very, very small.
[Guest]: But a third thing that I did, which was in a sense, one of my few own personal experience of
[Guest]: what Howard Marks calls second order thinking, was to try and figure, okay,
[Guest]: that let's assume that this debt crisis happens, and how are governments going to react?
[Guest]: And the only way I saw them doing it was to further lower the price of money,
[Guest]: because then the cost of servicing those loans goes down. So if you want the banks to become
[Guest]: healthy again, you want to make it easier for them to repay the money. And you possibly want to give
[Guest]: them more money, you want to give them more money on terms which don't make it difficult for them.
[Guest]: So you start dropping the price of money now, because in most of the world, money is very,
[Guest]: very fluid, it flows from one jurisdiction to another. I imagined a scenario where central
[Guest]: banks around the world were going to start competing to reduce the cost of money,
[Guest]: both to depreciate, both to make it easier for banks and other financial institutions to repay,
[Guest]: as well as to drive up exports, which then everybody would feel the need for.
[Guest]: And in that kind of competitive depreciation, what I saw happening is people taking recourse to
[Guest]: gold as a hedge for a non-depreciating currency. So, you know, unlike a dollar,
[Guest]: which occurs on balance sheets, both on the asset and the liability side, gold is an asset which
[Guest]: you can hold without there being a counterparty on the other side. And therefore, it becomes
[Guest]: a very attractive place to go to when currency stability is a question. You know, you don't
[Guest]: know how the dollar is going to move against the euro. And so if you're in euro, you don't want
[Guest]: to be in dollar any longer, you don't know how the yen is going to behave, you're certainly not
[Guest]: interested in the rupee, and so you're going to. So this was sort of second order thinking.
[Guest]: And you put a lot of money into gold.
[Guest]: I put a fair amount of money into gold. And that, of course, did phenomenally well. It just went on
[Guest]: this crazy bull run from about $700 an ounce in 2007. I think it peaked at about $1,800 by 2012.
[Guest]: And meanwhile, the rupee also went down. So the return you got was a product of two things.
[Guest]: See, I did all of these three in retrospect.
[Guest]: But it's easy to say that I would have taken a much larger pool of money to
[Guest]: short on, you know, I've got a lot more gold, but you know, that's very easy to say.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a hindsight bias. But the very fact that you saw it coming and you actually acted
[Amit Varma]: on it and took the great risk of losing a lot of money, whether in terms of, you know, nominal
[Amit Varma]: returns, or you know, just actually losing the money is quite something you had skin in the game
[Amit Varma]: as Talib would say.
[Guest]: Talib invites very, very mixed reactions. But I think some people are very, very
[Guest]: I think somewhere, A, you know, he's a very good thinker. And B, I love that,
[Guest]: that sort of code of conduct. It's like a very old code of conduct and which is,
[Guest]: you have to have skin in the game. And I think we're seeing more of that in many ways in the
[Guest]: world today. This whole model of building companies around, around entrepreneurs and VCs,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth is at its core is this whole aspect of skin in the game,
[Guest]: as opposed to old companies, which are built purely by bankers, you know,
[Guest]: had very little skin in the game, it was just the capital and the interest on it.
[Guest]: Here people are willing to take the upside in terms of the return within the company,
[Guest]: rather than from the company. So I like all of this. And I think somewhere at core,
[Guest]: even though I didn't grow up in the Levant, and didn't have all of these ancient Mediterranean
[Guest]: trading codes, hardwired into me, somewhere deep inside of me, I love this concept of
[Amit Varma]: skin in the game. And, yeah, I mean, I mean, Talib is a phenomenal character in the sense his
[Amit Varma]: books are great. And he is a hardcore total troll on Twitter. In fact, I can, you know, whenever he
[Amit Varma]: attacks someone on Twitter, whom I haven't heard of, I immediately check out his work, because it
[Amit Varma]: so happens that some of my favourite public intellectuals have been attacked by Talib on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter from Philip Tetlock to Steven Pinker to Nate Silver to Per Bailand. All these are very
[Amit Varma]: fine thinkers and Talib keeps going after them. So maybe that's a good metric for figuring out
[Amit Varma]: who is a thinker worth following. We'll take a quick commercial break now. And some of our
[Amit Varma]: listeners might be getting frustrated at what about the present crisis? Can you please talk
[Amit Varma]: about that? Hang on, we're getting there slowly. We are getting there slowly. Another couple of
[Amit Varma]: hours of conversation. I'm just kidding. Another one minute and then we will be on the current
[Unknown]: crisis. Hello, everybody. Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network. If you
[Unknown]: are not following us on social media, please make sure you do. We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook
[Unknown]: and Instagram. And also just a reminder, if you like what you're listening to take a screenshot
[Unknown]: of what you're listening to and tag us on social media and we will repost your post. Also, please
[Unknown]: do tell a friend if you're enjoying a podcast, which you think a friend would enjoy. Do tell
[Unknown]: them. I think that that is something that really helps us. I think that we do see, you know, I mean,
[Unknown]: like increases in listenerships when you guys do that. So please, please do tell friends that you
[Unknown]: are enjoying what podcast you're listening to. Last week, we launched a new show called Agla
[Unknown]: Station Adulthood with best friends, Ritasha Rathod and Ayushi Amin. They talk about their
[Unknown]: journey into adulthood. On the first episode, they discuss crushes and female friendships. And on
[Unknown]: this week's episode, they try to crack the code on how to adult. You can also catch Ritasha and
[Unknown]: Ayushi on this week's Cyrus Says where they talk to Cyrus about the podcast, what constitutes acting
[Unknown]: like a grown up and Ritasha gives Cyrus detailed instructions to reach Mud Island. Know Your Kanu
[Unknown]: with Ambar Rana is back with a new season. On the first episode of season two, Ambar is joined by
[Unknown]: model Hasleen Kaur and actor Laura Mishra to talk about civic issues. On the Empowering series,
[Unknown]: host Zarina Poonawalla is joined by investment banker Neetu L. Singhani, who shares her experience
[Unknown]: of being a single mother. On 9XM Soundcast, host Deeva Bhatt is joined by Aditi Singh Sharma.
[Unknown]: Aditi shares interesting stories about her childhood in Russia and Dehradun and singing
[Unknown]: for a rock band in Delhi. This week on Gol Gappas, Rupti Khamkar is joined by Priya Bapat,
[Unknown]: an actor par excellence who shares some incredible stories about self-love and prioritizing oneself.
[Unknown]: This week on the Pragati podcast, Sandesh Anand joins Pawan Srinath to talk about cyber security.
[Unknown]: On Advertising is Dead, Varun is joined by CEO and co-founder of Terribly Tiny Tales, Anuj Gosalia.
[Unknown]: They discuss the emergence of short form content. On The Habit Coach, Ashton Docter talks about
[Unknown]: acupressure acupuncture techniques and their benefits. On Puliyabazi, Puranay and Saurabh
[Unknown]: discuss the political history, present and future of Balochistan with former RAW officer Tilak
[Unknown]: Divasar. This week on Paperback, Satyajit and Racheta talk to Sanchita Lahot about books that
[Unknown]: bring forth an individual's hardships. And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back, you're listening to The Scene in the Unseen with me, Amit Verma. And my guest today is
[Amit Varma]: Mohit Satyanand, who's just finished telling us about how he made tons of money off the 2008
[Guest]: financial crisis. I wouldn't call it tons, Amit, but yeah, it was the beginning of a small nest egg.
[Amit Varma]: The beginnings of a small nest egg. I mean, nest egg. Yeah, I mean, like you said, the crisis are
[Amit Varma]: relative and so is tons. So for me, I'm sure it would be tons. But let's get kind of to the meat
[Amit Varma]: of the episode. I mean, what what prompted me to ask you to come on the show was a chat we were
[Amit Varma]: having a couple of evenings ago, where you were giving me all your reasons for why we are not just
[Amit Varma]: in a crisis now, but it's a worse crisis and people think or acknowledge and it's only going to get
[Amit Varma]: worse. And this is obviously a very different kind of crisis. Nothing else. It's very, very different.
[Guest]: It's very, very different. And there's several components to it. So let me sort of try and
[Guest]: unravel and outline some of them, which can't be done as elegantly as you do with something which
[Guest]: you look at in hindsight, and which has been widely and deeply reported upon and has been
[Guest]: the subject of several very, very erudite books and hundreds of doctoral theses and so on and so
[Guest]: forth. But I think that we have to look at the current Indian situation very much as a continuum
[Guest]: of what happened in 2008. Where like the rest of the world, we suffered from the global financial
[Guest]: crisis. The US under its newly anointed President, Barack Obama, moved extraordinarily swiftly to
[Guest]: restore health to the banking system. Huge sums of money were invented, conjured up, pumped in all
[Guest]: kinds of programs with different names, etc, etc, including the very, very vast tarpaulin of the
[Guest]: TARP were made available to banks, banks were shut down, banks were bought by other banks,
[Guest]: all under the very, very watchful eye of Treasury and the Federal Reserve and the President. And
[Guest]: this despite the fact that if you are to take a call between Wall Street and Main Street,
[Guest]: you would say that Barack Obama represented Main Street rather than Wall Street. But the first
[Guest]: thing that he did was to repair Wall Street. And in a sense, if you look back at the political
[Guest]: economy of the US, the fact that Main Street sort of got neglected is a major reason I would say for
[Guest]: the Trump ascendancy. But the reason I bring the US up is that somehow in India, we have this
[Guest]: enormous culture of forbearance, sweeping things under the table, ignoring the problems and hoping
[Guest]: that they will go away, etc, etc, etc. So, the kind of rapidity and aggression with which the
[Guest]: US financial system was repaired, didn't find expression over here. And we sort of pretended
[Guest]: that everything could continue pretty much as it was, that this was a blip, and it would get
[Guest]: restored. And, you know, of course, a lot of good things happened, because as a financial system,
[Guest]: the rest of the world got restored, and interest rates got lowered to new lows, in fact, to
[Guest]: negative numbers, money started flowing in again, and we all sort of figured that it's all right.
[Guest]: But as we're seeing over the last two or three years, our banking system was actually getting
[Guest]: unhealthier and unhealthier and unhealthier. Two things happened. One is that I think Raghuram
[Guest]: Rajan realized that we needed to look at bank loans much more severely. And therefore, he mandated
[Guest]: much, much stricter norms. So, in fact, he forced the uncovering of a lot of bad loans and put much,
[Guest]: much more stringent discovery norms in place and so on, to the extent that you see,
[Guest]: not as a mainstream of thought, but as almost a trial balloon going up right now, which is,
[Guest]: perhaps we shouldn't have been so rigid. You know, I don't want to comment on that. I think
[Guest]: it's always good to, to see what's happening and then perhaps take a view on it. But that view
[Guest]: should be in public, not hidden in subcommittees and not even coming to boards and not being talked
[Guest]: about and so on. So, the banking system was getting increasingly rotten. And what we saw,
[Guest]: if we go back to my starting point about investment, we saw massive investment taking place.
[Guest]: And a lot of it turned out to be malinvestment. So, you saw
[Guest]: organized, you saw Atata, for example, you know,
[Guest]: investing in steel in the US and in Jaguar Land Rover.
[Guest]: Jaguar Land Rover. You saw a company which is doing spectacularly well and were the pioneers
[Guest]: and the brand leaders in television entertainment, which is or not the company, the group,
[Guest]: the Z group, investing in infrastructure and resources and dish TV and so on so forth.
[Guest]: So, it was almost as if this enormous amount of money that was on tap made people think,
[Guest]: oh, there's so much money, what can I do with it? During a period where again, we were back to
[Guest]: new lows in interest rates in India, India had always been a very, very high interest rate regime.
[Guest]: But now there was all of this money. And there were all of these people who were relatively
[Guest]: new businessmen who had done extraordinarily well in fields, which was now saying, you know,
[Guest]: I'm a good businessman, business is business. And what can I do with all of this money?
[Guest]: And then of course, we had just as with the US, we had this obsession with real estate.
[Guest]: It was almost as though the word real was some sort of guarantee of real return.
[Guest]: Real estate is real. So how can you lose in it? There are a million Indians being born every
[Guest]: month, they need places to go to. India is urbanizing, therefore we need real estate.
[Guest]: And this sort of story started feeding on itself. And we had a bull run in real estate, which was
[Guest]: co-terminus with that in the US. So 2007, 2008, we saw a blip in that. But then as the money started
[Guest]: coming back in, the graphs resumed, they didn't go down. And so people kept building. And
[Guest]: regulation, very, very, very, very poor people were using advances from buyers, not to build
[Guest]: against what the advances were for, but to buy more land. And we had this lovely word being
[Guest]: tossed around land banks. You know, almost as though the fact that you had land meant that the
[Guest]: money was safe. Whereas you were bidding up the price, and there were often no buyers for it.
[Guest]: So we saw this enormous, enormous amount of investment taking place.
[Guest]: And investment rates in India just kept going up. And savings rates kept going up. The savings
[Guest]: rates in India peaked in 2008, at like 38, 39%, which was, again, unprecedented. And that coupled
[Guest]: with the money that was coming in from abroad, meant that your investment rates and fixed capital
[Amit Varma]: were like 40%. And what also happened during this period is that banks made a lot of malinvestments,
[Amit Varma]: and they continue to double down on it rather than declare something as a bad loan, for example,
[Amit Varma]: which is not coming back.
[Guest]: As I said, there was this, we don't want to recognise, we don't want to recognise bad loans,
[Guest]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: And also the short term investments of the bankers and the officials in charge come into play,
[Amit Varma]: because their incentives are that, you know, during their term, they don't want to look
[Amit Varma]: bad by declaring bad loans and all of that, because in some sense, it seems to reflect on them,
[Amit Varma]: they would rather give more loans, throw good money after bad, and kick the problem down the
[Guest]: road for the next guy to solve.
[Guest]: Yeah, so to stay with the issue of incentives, you know, again, we have the principal agency
[Guest]: problem. And it's very clear if you draw a sharp line, obviously, there are people on both sides
[Guest]: of the line. But if you draw a sharp line between the private banks and the public sector banks,
[Guest]: it's very clear that there's a, there's a radical difference in terms of non performing assets,
[Amit Varma]: which is a polite word for bad loans.
[Guest]: In fact, I've had an episode on that as well.
[Guest]: It's very clear that, you know, you can really draw a sharp line in between. There are exceptions
[Guest]: on both sides. But as an aggregate, the difference in NPA ratios, factor of three is to one or
[Guest]: something like that. So it's very clear that there's that agency problem as well.
[Guest]: And again, this is not, you know, people always want to hedge that and mealy mouth it and so on.
[Guest]: And so 10 days ago, when we had the 50th anniversary of bank nationalization,
[Guest]: I saw all these articles which said bank nationalization was necessary, and it was
[Guest]: imperative and so on. I couldn't even bring myself to read them.
[Guest]: Horrendous and economically illiterate.
[Guest]: Yeah, completely, completely. So, especially when we've seen the results, it's not that the
[Guest]: jury is out, the jury is in. The results are very clear. Anyway, so I think there was a third
[Guest]: factor. This is only my own personal idiosyncratic spin on it, which is that loans are priced in
[Guest]: nominal terms, which means that as far as a loan is concerned, aside from interest, today's money
[Guest]: is as good as yesterday's money. There's no accounting for the change in the real buying
[Guest]: power of that money. Now, what happens as a result is that if your loan book is going up by
[Guest]: 20 percent per annum in a situation where GDP is going up by eight or nine percent and inflation
[Guest]: is going up by seven or eight percent, then even if you have a static market share of the GDP,
[Guest]: your loan book is going to go up by 16 percent per annum. That's the nominal growth in GDP.
[Guest]: Now, what this does is that if a loan from five years ago goes bad, in those five years,
[Guest]: your loan book has doubled and therefore the share of the NPA to your assets today is,
[Guest]: has halved. Right? Now, this was the rate at which the economy was growing in nominal terms,
[Guest]: 2008, 9, 10, etc., etc., etc. Since then, what has happened is that the GDP in real terms,
[Guest]: nobody knows the number, let's say it's six percent, inflation is, let's say, three percent.
[Guest]: So, now your GDP is growing at nine percent per annum. For the real value of that bad loan made
[Guest]: some years ago to half is now not going to take five years, but ten years. And therefore, the
[Guest]: weight of old bad loans in your system starts showing up much earlier.
[Guest]: So, a combination of a slowing economy,
[Guest]: slowing inflation, and all of those horrible loans made when real estate was fashionable,
[Guest]: and very important in our country, which is a more microeconomic thing,
[Guest]: there was this enormous drive towards PPP, public-private partnership in infrastructure.
[Guest]: Everybody jumped into it. Everybody thought it was a great idea. And I have to say, so did I.
[Guest]: So, I'm not saying, you know, told you so. Everybody jumped into PPP. But as it turns out,
[Guest]: the models were not thought through carefully. There was no clarity on how the repayment would
[Guest]: come. And so, people with absolutely no experience of how to recover money from infrastructure
[Guest]: projects in an economy and a regulation system, which is still fairly socialist and it's sort of,
[Guest]: oh, how can you charge people so much? Oh, let's stop toll on this. Oh, we can't charge flyers so
[Guest]: much to take off from Delhi Airport, etc., etc., etc. So, here were all these people who didn't
[Guest]: know how to roll out infrastructure projects, whose background was in making television shows or
[Guest]: running trucking systems or you name it, all jumping into PPP because it was fashionable
[Guest]: and because they were going to get brownie points from their local politician for setting up 20
[Guest]: miles of toll road or whatever, all jumping into this game without any clue as to how to manage
[Guest]: them. And more importantly, without a clear political shift having been made in favor of
[Guest]: people paying for infrastructure. So, all of these went horribly belly up. And so, when you have this
[Guest]: kind of situation where something that becomes flavor of the decade and huge amounts of investment
[Guest]: pile into it, which in our case was both housing as well as infrastructure as compared to the US
[Guest]: where it was virtually a monoline story. And then they all turn bad. And now you have the same
[Guest]: dynamic playing, which is banks having to write off money, investment committees and banks turning
[Guest]: conservative, available funds going down, government getting strapped because the government is now the
[Guest]: sole owner and therefore you can't mobilize funds from outside in order to recapitalize those banks,
[Guest]: recapitalization funds being restricted, you have the entire credit system choking up.
[Guest]: And so, credit growth starts going down. And that's what we've been seeing for the last
[Guest]: few years. It should have happened 10 years ago, you know, and it's not one party versus the next
[Guest]: because during these 10 years, we've had UPA 2 and we've had NDA 1, you know. So, I'm not pointing
[Guest]: the blame at anyone political dispensation.
[Amit Varma]: And the impulses of the state or the impulses of the state at the end of the day, which party is
[Amit Varma]: in power is an unnis bis kafar akreli.
[Guest]: Yeah, that's pretty clear now. And so, you had this massive credit crunch. And then for a whole
[Guest]: host of reasons, some endogenous, some exogenous, you've also had slowing growth. Now, I think what
[Guest]: we're seeing is exceedingly complex. It doesn't fall into the simple narrative with which one
[Guest]: could perhaps express what happened in 2008. We're seeing slowing growth, we are seeing
[Guest]: obfuscation of reality, which means the data is not coming out accurately, which stands hugely in
[Guest]: the way of finding solutions. Because if you don't know what the problem is, you can't find the
[Guest]: solution. Almost pure riot, I have to say that, but one has to because that is the situation.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an episode on the GDP with the economist Rajeshwari Sengupta a few weeks ago. So, I'd
[Amit Varma]: recommend check that out. I learnt a lot in that episode.
[Guest]: Yeah. And so, you know, we have a situation where for the last four years, we've been
[Guest]: squabbling, or three years, we've been squabbling about what the GDP growth rate is. And even by
[Guest]: the government's own numbers, it's 5.8% for the last quarter, and there's a government which said
[Guest]: there would bring GDP up to 10%. Now, that's a pie in the sky, because to go back to what I
[Guest]: earlier said, unless you have high savings and you have high investment, you're not going to have
[Guest]: high growth. And the numbers that we do know is that savings rates have gone down from 38% to
[Guest]: 32% or 33%, and that capital formation has gone down from 40% to the low 30%. So, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: growth is going to come down. And in fact, all of these other indicators are so bad that it seems
[Amit Varma]: implausible that the GDP is what the government says it is, it just fails the smell test.
[Guest]: Yeah, it completely fails the smell test. And so, I sort of say, you know, it's somewhere between
[Guest]: four and five plus, and I hesitate to go much over 5%. And... And we don't even understand the
[Amit Varma]: full impact of demonetization, because so much of it was in the informal sector, which is most of
[Amit Varma]: our economy. Yeah, which is no longer getting recorded. And yeah, so, you know, as I said,
[Guest]: there were a whole host of both exogenous and endogenous factors. One of the endogenous factors
[Guest]: was certainly demonetization. And the ripple effects of that were very, very, very, very
[Guest]: strong. And the ripple effects of that we don't know. One of the major exogenous factors, but
[Guest]: you can't say it's entirely exogenous, because for a while we blamed slowing exports on the fact
[Guest]: that global trade is shrinking. But at the same time, we know that Bangladesh is now exporting
[Guest]: more governments than we are, where we used to be a global leader. We know that exports to GDP
[Guest]: are going up in Vietnam. So as a small, relatively small global player, you can hugely increase your
[Guest]: market share, but we're not able to do that. So that's a partly exogenous, partly endogenous
[Guest]: factor. And as a capital short economy, one of the ways in which to grow is to increase your
[Guest]: exports. And we've singularly failed at that, you know, most of the emerging nations have grown
[Guest]: on the back of export led industry, we've completely failed to do that. So it's really now,
[Guest]: for the last two or three years, we've been hearing what I actually find a fairly amusing
[Guest]: story, which is that out of the drivers of economic growth, India is functioning on only
[Guest]: one engine, which is consumption. I find that quite hilarious, because consumption is not an
[Guest]: engine of economic growth. It's a product of economic growth. As I said, the engine of economic
[Guest]: growth is investment. And where that comes from internal savings or external savings is,
[Guest]: is a different matter. But you've got to have productive investments if you have growth,
[Guest]: and you can't say that consumption is an engine. I mean, the Keynesian solution that everyone sort
[Amit Varma]: of puts forward is that if the government just pumps more money into the economy,
[Amit Varma]: consumption will go up because people will spend more. And if people spend more, and there is
[Amit Varma]: greater demand for goods and services, that will be sparked and so on into a virtuous cycle.
[Guest]: Well, you know, there is some truth to that. But it's a very, very distant truth. Because first,
[Guest]: you've got to create that consumption. And then that consumption has got to go up enough for
[Guest]: entrepreneurs to feel that now they need to expand capacity, and then they've got to expand
[Guest]: the capacity. And then that expanded capacity is going to lead to more employment. So you know,
[Guest]: it's a cycle that you have to continue for a long time before it starts kicking in. At this point
[Guest]: in time in India, yes, that would probably be the only solution. But the fact is that
[Guest]: the fact is that our government's finances also now enormously stretched.
[Amit Varma]: And any money that the government puts into the economy like this also has an opportunity cost,
[Amit Varma]: it's coming from somewhere and could have been put to some other use.
[Guest]: Absolutely. So we, you know, the favorite phrase is crowding out. So government investment crowds
[Guest]: out private investment. Not from the point of view of making it difficult for me to set up a
[Guest]: factory because government has bought the land, but from a financial point of view, because
[Guest]: there'll be less credit available for you, less credit available. And, you know, there is,
[Guest]: at a recent colloquium on the political, well, on India post budget,
[Guest]: Yamini Iyer of central of the Center for Policy Research made a very perceptive speech,
[Guest]: only hindsight will tell us whether she's right or not. But her analysis of the narrative and the
[Guest]: way it shifted over the last few years, I thought was very, very sharp, where she said, is that we
[Guest]: moved away from the current leadership of the economy, describing it as a vibrant, growing
[Guest]: economy, to talking about transfers and talking about redistribution as being the main narrative.
[Guest]: I thought that was really, really perceptive, because that dialogue is completely gone about
[Guest]: India being the fastest growing large economy in the world, and we're going to grow at 10% per
[Amit Varma]: 10% per annum, etc, etc. And, and it reeks of desperation. What you're implicitly admitting
[Amit Varma]: with that is that the pool is not growing, the pie is not growing large, quickly enough for
[Guest]: everyone to benefit from it. So what little there is of it, we are going to distribute,
[Amit Varma]: and we are going to do it in populist ways and try to win votes for it and spin it with all these
[Amit Varma]: different narratives. But actually, we are just screwing everybody. Absolutely, absolutely. And,
[Guest]: you know, we seem to have, we seem to have this ability in terms of governance and so on, so forth,
[Guest]: to get to get some things desperately wrong. So, for example, there was this huge dialogue about
[Guest]: make in India, etc, etc, etc. The fact is that in the last two months, I've got two sets of notices
[Guest]: from the income tax relating to angel tax. You know, you can't get something as straight as that,
[Guest]: which is that a tax that was created to try and prevent the army transfer of funds into shell
[Guest]: companies, that income tax officer can't make out the difference between a startup and a shell
[Guest]: company in some by lane in Calcutta. You know, there's something seriously wrong in the
[Guest]: communication between the economic high command and the income tax department. If you can't make
[Guest]: that out, you know, 21 year old can make out the difference between a shell company and a startup.
[Guest]: You know, we still haven't been able to sort out ports and infrastructure relating to exports.
[Guest]: So, all this stuff is just empty rhetoric. And you can game the making in the ease of doing business
[Guest]: statistics by concentrating on what happens in Bombay and Delhi, just as you can game any exam.
[Amit Varma]: But I mean, any metric can be gamed and any data which is brought out by the government can be
[Guest]: manipulated. So what does it all mean? Yeah, but if you ask if you ask any businessman off the
[Guest]: record, the compliance demands have gone up. And India has now become the biggest exporter of
[Guest]: millionaires after China. That's really serious summit. And the way in which it's happening is
[Guest]: a lot of small and medium sized businessmen have decided it's not really worth it, running
[Amit Varma]: businesses. And I've spoken to businessmen, friends of mine who are disgusted, who are thinking of
[Amit Varma]: leaving who keep talking about, you know, if we could just shut down our factories, blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: and leave tomorrow, we could and some of them in fact, say that GST, the way it's being implemented
[Amit Varma]: and carried out is far worse for them than demonetization. Sure, sure, the compliance costs
[Guest]: are enormous. And the government instead of making it easier to pay taxes and so on making it more
[Guest]: and more difficult. And, you know, all of these operate at the margin. But the fact is that
[Guest]: if you a lose millionaires, be if you move money from rich people to poor people,
[Guest]: both of them result in lower savings rates. Because the marginal propensity to consume
[Guest]: of the poor is much higher than that of the rich, you know, and if and the other shift that's
[Guest]: happened, especially over the last month or two, is that overseas investors are looking at India
[Guest]: askance. And so each of these in numerical terms may not be a huge amount, but you know, you add a
[Guest]: few basis points here and a few basis points there and take that away from savings and hence
[Guest]: investments and so on, you end up with fairly significant drops in the number of people who
[Guest]: invest in India. You end up with fairly significant drops in economic growth at a time when the
[Guest]: government is really, really hungry for political reasons to put money into current expenditure
[Guest]: rather than into investments. And so you basically undermine the long term, the long term
[Guest]: productive capacity of the government. And to go back to, you know, my what we were talking about,
[Guest]: which is about investments and so on. All of this is happening against a backdrop where
[Guest]: for the last four or five years, there was this sort of
[Guest]: rah-rah around the Indian economy, you know, fastest growing economy, major economy in the
[Guest]: world, a dynamic focused government, which doesn't have to mess with what's happening in parliament,
[Guest]: and therefore pro growth, etc, etc, etc. And your introduction about narrative, you know,
[Guest]: this was a very powerful narrative and it carried, it carried the stock markets through.
[Guest]: Now, the same company with the same profitability today, if it's looking at high growth for the next
[Guest]: five years, is going to command a very, very different price from the same company with the
[Guest]: same profit number today where growth is looking shaky. And I think that Indian stock markets have
[Guest]: not yet reckoned with the disjunct between the way in which stock markets are getting priced
[Guest]: and the underlying growth of the economy. You know, the price of Indian stocks is
[Guest]: at least three standard deviations above the mean and that can't sustain for very long.
[Guest]: And that's what brings me to what I see as just from that limited point of view, forget the
[Guest]: economic or the financial or the fiscal or the jobs or the, or the other, the demographic crises
[Guest]: in the country and so on, is to this, to this particular opportunity, you could say, for people
[Guest]: like me to say, you know what, the stock market is grossly overpriced. A, protect yourself by
[Guest]: taking some money off the table. And in that sense, you know, the last four or five years have
[Guest]: been a slow motion, less intense sort of replay of what happened in, to me in 2007, where I said
[Guest]: markets are going to crash. And they didn't, till they did, to everyone's thing, oh, you know,
[Guest]: we're going to see a resurgence of investment and the power sector is going to mushroom because we
[Guest]: have this new scheme of called Udaya or whatever it was, and infrastructure is going to boom,
[Guest]: infrastructure is going to boom, etc, etc. And I say, you know what, it's not so easy. And people
[Guest]: were selling it as a Modi story. And I was saying, you know, it's not, it's not Modi. It's about the
[Guest]: fact that certain very, very, very hard headed, deep responses to the banking crisis need to be
[Guest]: made, and they're not being made. And if you think Modi is going to do it, that's great. I was mildly
[Guest]: hopeful that he would, but one didn't see that kind of break from incrementalism and hiding
[Guest]: things under the carpet. In fact, in terms of hiding things under the carpet, the Modi government
[Guest]: proved to be even more adroit than earlier governments. There are masters of narrative
[Amit Varma]: management to the point that they seem to think perhaps correctly that narrative management is
[Amit Varma]: all that matters. Governance does not. Optics is everything and the 2019 election seem to have
[Amit Varma]: even vindicated that. But so my sort of follow up question is that, you know, at the start of the
[Amit Varma]: show, I mentioned the different kinds of crisis that we're having, which have been decades in
[Amit Varma]: building up, there's a jobs crisis, which is exacerbated by demographics in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: demographic dividend is turning into a demographic disaster, you have 12 million people coming into
[Amit Varma]: the workforce every month, 12 to 20 million, depending on where you take the numbers from
[Amit Varma]: and every year, luckily, more than a million a month and 12 to 20 million every year. And
[Amit Varma]: those jobs simply aren't there, which you would imagine would lead to youth unrest and not really
[Amit Varma]: manifested in a big way yet. There is an agricultural crisis, which has been building up
[Amit Varma]: for decades. And again, I've had episodes on that. And it's not necessarily the fault of any one
[Amit Varma]: party or the other. But the fact of the matter is that this party also is doing nothing to solve it.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, there is now this credit crisis and a different sort of financial crisis in the making
[Amit Varma]: and a fiscal crisis and a fiscal crisis. So my two sort of questions for you is that number one,
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine that Luke something's got to give at some point, what could it possibly be? And the
[Amit Varma]: second question is that what can now be done to mitigate this? And what is realistic to happen?
[Guest]: As far as the second is concerned, I don't see anything that can be done in the short term. And
[Guest]: governments are notoriously bad at solving long term problems. And to take a hard line
[Guest]: on matters as we've seen in the past, especially in India, requires a crisis, a crisis that
[Guest]: actually sort of wraps you in the face. You know, financial crises, economic crises are a long time
[Guest]: in coming. The ingredients are all there. But when do they blow up? It requires a sharp discontinuity
[Guest]: somewhere. And you can't, you can't pinpoint either the time or the manner of it.
[Amit Varma]: And what strikes me about this one and why it might be deeper is it's not just an economic
[Amit Varma]: crisis per se, it's a social crisis as well.
[Guest]: But let me just stay with the economic crisis.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Guest]: Just for a second. Which is that, you know, all of this is against the backdrop of
[Guest]: very high provision of liquidity around the world. And if that for any reason had stopped,
[Guest]: then the crisis in India would have, would have been deep and sharp. That's not happened as yet.
[Guest]: And that's papered over some of the cracks. It's allowed us to keep going. Because even
[Guest]: through the last three years, until literally until July, we were still getting money from
[Guest]: abroad. People were still putting money in. People were still buying the India as a growth
[Guest]: story kind of narrative. So I think that as long as there is global liquidity, and
[Guest]: as long as a significant percentage of those who are those global investors were tasked with putting
[Guest]: money into emerging markets coming into India, I think that that crisis may not strike very sharply.
[Guest]: So, you know, maybe again, going back to my personal practice, maybe those shorts won't
[Guest]: yield the same kind of x returns as they did in 2008. But I still prefer to be largely out of
[Guest]: the markets than in them, even if I don't take huge, deep, short exposures.
[Guest]: I believe that the crunch, when it comes, will come from the external sector.
[Guest]: It's, it will come when we find it difficult to borrow money from abroad. It will come when
[Guest]: when the Indian government finds it difficult to meet its payments. Because we still have,
[Guest]: you know, we keep talking about our, our foreign reserves. But again, I find it very funny that
[Guest]: we have this number of foreign exchange. Nobody talks about what we owe abroad, which is always
[Guest]: larger than what we our reserves are, you know. So the fact is that on a daily basis,
[Guest]: even though our bond markets are not as liquid as they should be, and there are restrictions on
[Guest]: foreign borrowing and so on. But the fact is that on a daily basis, foreign investors are buying
[Guest]: bonds, you know. And if the underlying economic reality continues to slide, a point in time will
[Guest]: come when the government can manufacture whatever narrative it wants to as far as the Indian
[Guest]: consumer is concerned. But foreign investors march to their own tune, you know, they're going to take
[Guest]: their own call. And, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and,
[Guest]: and if at some point in time they decide, you know, these are not risks worth taking,
[Guest]: then conditions can snowball very, very rapidly.
[Amit Varma]: AMIT BHANDARI And what social manifestation
[Amit Varma]: do you see of this?
[Guest]: AMJad India has got to be the most tolerant country
[Guest]: in the world. You know, we tolerate every kind of injustice, every kind of bad governance.
[Guest]: I mean, we were having this conversation, Amit, about a month ago when I was in Bombay
[Guest]: and we were having dinner and we were talking about the state of infrastructure.
[Guest]: I find it inconceivable that in the year 2019, you can have one of the financial centers,
[Guest]: if not of the world, then certainly of Asia, running on as antiquated and dilapidated and
[Guest]: uncomfortable and sweaty a suburban train system as exists in Bombay.
[Guest]: It's anti-diluvian, it's inhuman, and you have 12 people a day dying as a result of
[Guest]: the way in which that rail system interfaces with the population.
[Amit Varma]: And it's normalized.
[Amit Varma]: We take it for granted and we have to get to work every day.
[Guest]: So that's the spirit of Bombay, quote unquote.
[Guest]: But this can only happen in Bombay.
[Guest]: Elsewhere, this would lead to riots.
[Guest]: You know, this can only happen in India.
[Guest]: So we've internalized all of this bullshit.
[Guest]: We've internalized the fact that the government can mistreat us whichever way it wants.
[Guest]: And it's part of our legacy, our spirit, our tolerance, our passivity, our Hinduism, whatever
[Guest]: else it is.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Maybe it's just part of our majburi.
[Amit Varma]: What do we do?
[Guest]: Well, you know, so, but the thing is that majburi is an Indian word.
[Guest]: And we've seen this movie in Latin America.
[Guest]: And this movie of bad governance, of urban decay, of lack of jobs has led to extreme
[Guest]: violence.
[Guest]: India surprisingly has very low crime rates, very low homicide rates.
[Guest]: So it is cultural.
[Guest]: And I think the other thing is, which is also cultural, is the fact that families are much
[Guest]: more tolerant of people within the family who don't do so well.
[Guest]: And they don't get frustrated at young men particularly, because we also have one of
[Guest]: the lowest female labor participation rates in the world.
[Guest]: So women are not necessarily expected to bring in money.
[Guest]: But the fact that the young man hasn't been able to get a job, you know, and he just sits
[Guest]: around and he hasn't got a job and he keeps applying to government jobs which aren't available
[Guest]: and he's not getting off his ass and going to sell newspapers at the corner or whatever
[Guest]: it is to make a living.
[Guest]: So we seem to take all of it in our stride.
[Guest]: And on balance, even though as an economist, I really, on balance, that's probably a good
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: I'd much rather live in a, in a poor and passive society than in a violent, bullet riddled
[Amit Varma]: one like, like Brazil, which is equally poor, but at some point on one less or something
[Guest]: will give us for true, much less poor, nevertheless, very intolerant of all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So to kind of round up this episode, let me ask you a question with which I sort of end
[Amit Varma]: many of my episodes on whatever the subject of the episode is that, you know, you've painted
[Amit Varma]: a very bleak picture of this current crisis.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a basket of crises, as it were, that we are undergoing right now.
[Amit Varma]: Looking forward to the next 10 years, what's the best case scenario?
[Guest]: What's the worst case scenario?
[Guest]: The worst case scenario is that we slide towards a Latin American kind of situation of deep
[Guest]: unrest and widespread impoverishment and deepening social fissures between the rich and the poor.
[Guest]: Poor countries which get into financial difficulty end up with these kind of patterns of distribution.
[Guest]: So that's the worst case scenario.
[Guest]: The best case scenario is that we have a government that realizes that we need to encourage entrepreneurship
[Guest]: in deed and through removing a lot of the barriers in place, of which there's an unending
[Guest]: list both in industry and services as well as in agriculture.
[Guest]: And that as a result, the current despondency among economic actors, I mean, entrepreneurs
[Guest]: and industrialists lifts and because, you know, this whole aspect of animal spirits
[Guest]: which Keynes talked about is a real fact.
[Guest]: It's the biggest unknown in the entire equation.
[Guest]: And if you can bring that back into the system, then the fact is that Indians are extraordinarily
[Guest]: entrepreneurial and even though it's a thin slice, the best educated Indians are extraordinarily
[Guest]: well educated and are extremely good at setting up businesses and finding the gap as it were.
[Guest]: And so that's the best case scenario that we're able to encourage entrepreneurship and
[Guest]: economic growth.
[Guest]: Is it likely to happen in as short a period as five to ten years is something that worries
[Guest]: me because when the wave changes from exuberance to pessimism, it takes a long time to reverse
[Guest]: and all of the impulses of the current government, which has five out of those ten years at the
[Guest]: very least to run seem to be towards control rather than encouragement.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of tragic because the best case scenario, as you pointed out, is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I sort of look at Indian history as a tussle between the state and society and
[Amit Varma]: society is madly creative and entrepreneurial and full of these animal spirits, but the
[Amit Varma]: state has restricted society from reaching its full potential in a manner of speaking,
[Amit Varma]: which continues to the present day.
[Amit Varma]: And the best case scenario in this case, to put your words slightly differently, is really
[Amit Varma]: the state getting out of the way of society.
[Amit Varma]: And kind of the opposite seems to be happening.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Moving towards tighter and tighter and tighter, top down control rather than letting.
[Guest]: So to put it in a third way, which is this gorgeous word, very simple word is trust.
[Guest]: I think those societies do best where there's widespread trust in the system.
[Guest]: We're seeing trust squeezed out of the system.
[Guest]: We are seeing deeper and deeper polarizations and certainly going back to businessmen and
[Guest]: businessmen are key to growth of an economy.
[Guest]: Businessmen are more and more looking over their shoulders as to what they should do,
[Guest]: where they should invest, whether their accounts are in order, etc., etc.
[Guest]: And if you can't bring trust back into the system and amplify it, obviously, we're not
[Guest]: going to get to Scandinavian levels of trust in five or 10 years.
[Guest]: But let's at least start moving in that direction.
[Amit Varma]: Then nothing's going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe the best case scenario is that things will get so bad that we are forced to move
[Amit Varma]: in that direction, Mohit.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I said.
[Amit Varma]: We need another crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And we need to end this podcast here because you, dear listener, must be so tired, though
[Amit Varma]: I am told that the seen and the unseen has made people across the country fitter as they
[Amit Varma]: prolong their exercise routines because they cannot bear to stop listening.
[Unknown]: So thank me for that.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: And thank you for coming on the show, Mohit.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow Mohit on Twitter at Mohit Satyanand,
[Amit Varma]: one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the seen and the unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The seen and the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: And if you've come this far, thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: I'm your host, Shiladitya Mokopadhyay.
[Unknown]: Hello everyone, I'm Zain.
[Unknown]: I'm Avanti.
[Unknown]: And welcome back to a brand new season of Marbles Lost and Found.
[Unknown]: A show on mental health and its stigma and we're kind of making it an open conversation.
[Unknown]: Pretty much yeah and we're really really excited about this season because we have a number
[Unknown]: of guests on and we'll be talking about things like addiction.
[Unknown]: Grief, children and mental health.
[Unknown]: Exactly, children mental health and our listeners have also written in.
[Unknown]: Yeah and we have an episode dedicated to that.
[Unknown]: Yes and guys thank you so much for writing and we really really appreciate it.
[Unknown]: And we're really excited for you to tune in on Tuesdays on the IVM website or app or wherever
[Unknown]: you get your podcasts from.
[Unknown]: And you can find Marbles Lost and Found on Facebook or you can find Marbles Lost and
[Unknown]: Found on Instagram as well.
[Unknown]: The handle being Marbles Podcast India.
[Unknown]: Can't wait for you to tune in.
[Unknown]: Thank you very much.
[Unknown]: See you soon.